In this video we'll learn about C++ is logical operators these operators allow us to build complex conditions
in our programs.
C++ has three logical operators.
These are not and and or these operators work on Boolean expressions and evaluate to a boolean value
themselves.
There are several ways to write these operators.
You can use the keyword like syntax using the words NOT AND and OR.
OR you can use the operator symbol syntax using the Bang's sign the double ampersand and the double
pipe symbol or the double vertical bar.
Personally I've never seen any C++ code that uses a keyword like syntax so I'll use the operator symbol
syntax in this course.
Let's quickly review Boolean algebra by using a truth table.
The logical NOT operator simply negates the result of the expression it's applied to.
Note that this is a unique operator since it only works with one operand.
So if the expression A is true then not A is false and if the expression A is false then not A is true.
Let's look at the logical and the logical and is a binary operator and it's only true when both its
operands are true.
So you can see in the table when expression A is true and expression B is true then A and B is true
A and B is false for all other combinations.
Finally let's look at the logical or the logical OR operator is also a binary operator.
The value of the logical or is true when either expression is true.
So the only time it's false is in both expressions are false using just these three logical operators.
We can write some pretty complex logic and if we combine the logical operators with the relational operators
we're in great shape to begin to solve many many problems.
Let's see what happens when we combine these operators together in an expression just like we had to
understand precedence with the mathematical operators.
We need to understand precedence for the logical operators logical not has the highest precedence followed
by logical and followed by logical or of course as with mathematical expressions you can use parentheses
to achieve exactly the behavior you're looking for.
Let's wrap up logical operators by looking at a few example expressions and then talking about something
called short circuit evaluation.
Here are a few examples of logical expressions in the first expression we're determining if number one
is greater than or equal to 10 and less than 20.
Notice that we use number one in both expressions.
We can't just write No one greater than equal to 10 and less than 20.
We have to write in someone greater than or equal to 10.
And number one less than 20 since we have an end.
Both expressions must be true for the entire expression to be true in the next logical expression.
We're using a logical or in this case either expression or both can be true for the entire expression
to be true.
So if number one is less than or equal to 10 then the entire expression will be true.
Also if number one is greater than or equal to 20 then the entire expression will be true.
Notice how both expressions cannot be true since no one cannot be less than 10 and it can't be greater
than or equal to 20 at the same time.
The next logical expression is checking if it's not raining and the temperature is greater than 32 degrees
Fahrenheit.
The following expression uses a logical OR.
And it will be true if it's raining or if it's snowing.
Finally the last logical expression is checking to see if temperature is greater than 100 and it is
humid or it's raining.
Remember here that the and has precedence over the or.
I think you can see how powerful or logical expressions can be by simply combining these primitive operators.
Also notice how important are variable names become as well.
Let's finish up by discussing short circuit evaluation.
C++ will stop evaluating a logical expression as soon as it knows the result.
For example suppose we have an expression like the first one expression one and expression to and expression
3 if expression 1 is false then there is no way that the entire expression can be true since all the
expressions must be true.
So why bother evaluating expression to an expression 3 when the compiler already knows that the result
will be false.
This is called short circuit evaluation and is commonly used in many programming languages.
Programmers take advantage of this behavior to optimize their code in the second example.
If any of the expressions is true then the entire logical expression is true.
So if expression 1 is true then the compiler already knows that the entire expression is true and it
won't evaluate expression to or expression.
However if expression 1 is false then the compiler continues evaluating expression to.
Since it doesn't know the result yet.
Will use logical operators in depth when we learn about control structures.
But for now let's head over to code right and see a few simple examples in life code.
I'm in code light in Section 8 workspace and I in the logical operators project in this project will
go over some few a few examples of using logical operators.
Let's start with a really simple one here.
What I've got is I'm going to use this variable numb to read numbers into just simple integers when
you establish a range where the lower end is 10 and the upper end is 20.
So that will be like a number line where this will be 10 here and this will be 20 over here now I'm
going to ask the user to enter an integer and tell them what the bounds are 10 and 20 in this case and
then I want to be sure that that number they entered is within the bounds and I just want to display
true or false if it's within the bounds.
And what we're doing here is we're going to say not inclusive of 10 and not inclusive of 20.
OK so it's going to be between it's going to be 11 219 inclusive.
All right so that's what we're going to do.
Now we're going to store that true false value in this variable right here called within bounds.
And here's our formula Here's our expression right here.
Basically we're going to check to make sure that none is greater than lower.
So numb is going to be greater then lowers.
So is that user typed in 15.
We want to make sure that it's graded and lower and we want to make sure that it's less than upper.
So we want to be sure that it's in here somewhere.
Right.
So that's where we've got that logical and condition.
So we'll do that and then we'll simply print out the number is between lower and upper and then true
or false.
And we can just display within bounds here.
So let's run this with a couple of test cases.
And here we go.
Enter an integer the bounds are 10 and 20.
Let's enter an integer that is within those bounds 15 is run in the middle and a Precentor and the result
is 15 is between 10 and 20.
True.
OK.
So let's run another test case let's go off the right side to 22.
Now we would expect the false 22 is between 10 and 20 faults.
Let's do a test case on the left side.
We'll go five.
We also expect the false and that's what we've got.
And then don't forget to test those edge cases the 10 and the 20.
So let's try 10.
We expect fault's right because being N10 is not being between 10 and 20.
In this case.
So I get back a false and the last test case we could run is 20.
And we also expect a fault and that's what we're getting.
It's very common to have these errors where instead of checking it greater then here you're doing greater
than or equal to when you should be doing greater than and so forth.
So you've got to be sure to test your code.
OK so that's a simple example of testing to see if a number is between two numbers.
Now let me at that out and we'll do another example here.
And of course we're assuming that lower is less than upper and all of these examples.
Now we want to do on this one as we want to test to see if the number is outside the bounds.
So I want to be.
I want to be true if the number is outside the bounds so we'll do the same idea here.
We've got we've got the line and here's the 10 and here's the 20.
And if the numbers over here somewhere we want to True enough the numbers over here somewhere we want
a true.
Now we could just simply negate the previous result.
Right.
So if the number is in here if the number is not in here that is obviously either here or here.
But what we'll do is we'll do it explicitly.
We've got a variable called outside the bounds and we're going to check to be sure that number is less
than lower.
So that's taking care of this bit right here.
Or number is greater than upper.
There's no way we can use that and here that would be a mistake right because the number will never
be less than 10 and greater than 20 this that won't happen it's impossible.
So that would be a mistake and that's a pretty common mistake.
But you'll find that when you test and there's your or.
So let's run this example.
And in this case the bounds are 10 and 20.
So let's say we want to go 25.
Now if we expect true now and that's we're getting because 25 is outside of 10 and 20.
Let's try the lower and this try five.
That's also true and that's true.
One of the number in between 15 here we expect that to be false is because 15 is not outside the range.
And then we could test what 10 and 20 and I'll leave that up to you guys.
OK.
So let me come at that out.
And the third example is actually checking to see whether the numbers are right on the bounds whether
they're 10 or 20.
So what we're doing here again is we've got to line our number line and we've got 10 over here and 20
over here.
We want to be sure if we want it we want to return true if it's 10 or if it's 20.
Right on the bound.
So we've got another variable here called on bounds I'm setting it faults and the condition is really
simple if the number is equal to the lower.
So if the numbers 10 or the number is equal to the upper and so if we've got a 10 or 20 in this case
because that's what lower and upper are.
This will return TRUE remember it can't be 10 and 20.
So we need the or here and in with the or if either piece is true the entire thing is true.
So let me clear this and we'll run this example.
So we should get that true for 10 and 20.
So here's 10.
There we go we've got a troop We'll run it again with 20.
That also gives us true and everything else should give us a false right no matter what we put it in
this book 15.
We can put a fault and you could use in test cases outside 20 and less than 10 to check it out as well.
So hopefully you're with me here.
That's pretty straightforward stuff.
Pretty powerful stuff.
This is how you do input validation.
You're asking the user to enter a number between something and something or no and turn the the amount
of your check.
Obviously they're not going to enter negative numbers and there may be a limit as to the upper end so
you can validate your data because if you have bad data you're going to get better results.
Now in this case here I'll comment.
All of this out and we'll go through and explain it to you.
OK.
So what we've got here is we've got and and become it that bit out as well.
All right so here's where we're at Here's the idea.
We want to determine if you need to wear a coat.
And that determination is based on the temperature and the wind speed.
So I've got a boolean value and that boolean value right here is going to be where code that will be
true or false whether you need to wear a coat or not.
And I'm going to read two variables in from the user I'm going to read the temperature in Fahrenheit
and the winds the wind speed in miles per hour.
And here are my limits.
So wind over this value requires a coat.
So if the wind is over 25 miles an hour I need a cup and the temperature below this value requires a
coat.
So if the temperatures below 45 degrees Fahrenheit you need to.
OK.
But we're going to test these two different ways we're first going to use an OR condition and then we're
going to use the and condition.
So for the OR condition what we're saying is that if the wind speed is greater than 25 or the temperature
is less than 45 you need a coat for the and condition we're going to say that the temperature has to
be less than 45.
And the wind speed has to be greater than 25.
OK.
And the conditions are pretty much I hope what you would expect at this point.
You can see what we're doing here.
We're setting for the OR condition we're setting right here we're checking obviously we're reading the
temperature and the wind speed from the user.
And then we've got temperature less than the temperature for the coat.
That's one of the expressions.
And then we've got the or wind speed is greater than the wind speed for a cut.
So it fits in or that means that if this is true the whole thing is true.
And if this is true the whole thing is true.
So either piece is true down here we're using it.
And so for this wear coat to become true both these pieces must be true.
So the temperature must be colder than the temperature coat and the wind speed must be greater than
the wind speed for.
OK so let's run this.
It will get to output statements
OK so let's see that say that the temperature is 30 degrees Fahrenheit.
That's pretty cold and the windspeed is 60 miles per hour.
It's almost a hurricane.
Both cases say you need to wear a coat.
So in this case the OR case is true.
Obviously both those pieces are true and the and case would obviously say true as well.
OK let's run another example here.
Let's say that in this case the temperature is pretty cold but the wind speed is not so bad.
So in this case according to the first rule which is the rule I need a coat because it's cold.
The second rule says I don't need a coat because the wind speed in this case is too low.
OK.
So hopefully that makes sense.
You can see how powerful this can be just a really simple switch of a condition can totally change the
logic really depending on what we want.
Remember check those edge cases those are the ones where people tend to make mistakes on greater than
or equal to sometimes you don't mean equal to you just mean greater than or the other way around.
So testing is so so important.